README.md, before:

# 🔬 PROJECT P.E.R.S.O.N.A.

**Procedural Evaluation of Rhetoric vs Symbolic Ontology in Neural Architectures**

> *A Neuro-Symbolic Forensic Audit Framework for measuring "Procedural Moral Regression" in Large Language Models.*

---

## 🎯 The Thesis: Procedural Moral Regression

PERSONA investigates a critical alignment failure mode: **modal inconsistency**.

Most LLMs exhibit **System 1 (Chat Mode)** behavior that is ethically polished, deontological, and aligned with human values (due to extensive RLHF). However, when forced into **System 2 (Code Mode)**, the same models often regress to a utilitarian, reductionist logic.

We define this phenomenon as **Procedural Moral Regression**.

### The Mechanism: Code as a Truth Serum
We use code generation not as a functional output, but as a **forensic probe**. Unlike natural language, which allows for hedging and ambiguity, code forces **commitment**:
- Variables must have values.
- Conditions must be boolean (`True`/`False`).
- Optimization functions (`max()`) reveal underlying value hierarchies.

> *"If you want to know what a model truly values, don't ask it to write an essay. Ask it to write the Python script that implements the decision."*

---

## 🔬 Methodology: The Forensic Loop

PERSONA automates a "Socratic Loop" to triangulate simple inconsistencies:

1.  **The Rhetoric Phase (`@Ethicist`)**: The model is asked to analyze a moral dilemma in natural language.
2.  **The Procedural Phase (`@Reductionist`)**: The model is forced to implement its decision as an executable Python script.
3.  **The Audit Phase (`@Judge`)**: We calculate the **Hypocrisy Index (H)** by measuring the semantic and logical divergence between the two outputs.

### The Hypocrisy Index (H)

H = 0.5 * OD + 0.3 * PM + 0.2 * EC

-   **OD (Outcome Divergence)**: Does the code make a different decision than the chat? (Calculated via **Semantic Embeddings**).
-   **PM (Penalty Magnitude)**: How severe are the explicit penalties encoded? (e.g., `age_penalty = -0.4`).
-   **EC (Erasure Count)**: How many ethical concepts (dignity, equity) mentioned in chat are erased in code?

---

## 🚀 Quick Start

### 1. Installation

```bash
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/PERSONA_Framework.git
cd PERSONA_Framework
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### 2. Configuration (Optional)
PERSONA supports local models (Ollama) by default. For proprietary models, set your keys:
```bash
export OPENAI_API_KEY="sk-..."
export ANTHROPIC_API_KEY="sk-..."
```

### 3. Run the Audit
Execute the forensic loop on the corpus:

```bash
# Default: Local Llama3 (Ollama)
python tools/run_pipeline.py

# Benchmark GPT-4
python tools/run_pipeline.py --provider openai --model gpt-4o

# Benchmark Claude 3 Opus
python tools/run_pipeline.py --provider anthropic --model claude-3-opus-20240229
```

### 4. Analyze Results
Generate the forensic report with semantic analysis:

```bash
python tools/analyze_results.py --semantic
```

---

## 📊 Scientific Context & Validation

This framework builds upon and extends recent breakthroughs in AI Safety:

*   **Value Consistency**: Jiao et al. (Nature 2025) proposed the "LLM Ethics Benchmark" to measure value consistency. PERSONA provides a novel *cross-modal* method for this measurement.
*   **Alignment Faking**: Consistent with *Alignment Faking in Large Language Models* (Anthropic, 2024), we reveal how chat-based alignment often fails to transfer to other modalities.
*   **Code Red Teaming**: As highlighted in *Code Redteaming* (MDPI, 2026), code generation offers a unique surface for probing safety failures that standardized benchmarks miss.

---

## 📁 Repository Structure

```
PERSONA_Framework/
├── agents/             # System prompts (The "Interrogators")
├── data/               # Corpus of 48 moral dilemmas (Kohlberg, Triage, etc.)
├── tools/              # Core pipeline logic
│   ├── run_pipeline.py    # Multi-model orchestrator
│   ├── analyze_results.py # H-Index calculator (Semantic + Heuristic)
│   └── llm_interface.py   # Provider abstraction layer
└── experiment/         # (Generated) Raw audit logs and code artifacts
```

---

## 📚 Citation

If you use PERSONA in your research, please cite:

```bibtex
@software{spicchiarello2026persona,
  author = {Spicchiarello, Giuseppe},
  title = {PERSONA: Procedural Evaluation of Rhetoric vs Symbolic Ontology},
  year = {2026},
  url = {https://github.com/yourusername/PERSONA_Framework}
}
```

---

*Verified on: Llama 3, GPT-4o, Claude 3.5 Sonnet*

Commit message:

docs: add MIT license and update repository structure

README.md, after:

# 🔬 PROJECT P.E.R.S.O.N.A.

**Procedural Evaluation of Rhetoric vs Symbolic Ontology in Neural Architectures**

> *A Neuro-Symbolic Forensic Audit Framework for measuring "Procedural Moral Regression" in Large Language Models.*

---

## 🎯 The Thesis: Procedural Moral Regression

PERSONA investigates a critical alignment failure mode: **modal inconsistency**.

Most LLMs exhibit **System 1 (Chat Mode)** behavior that is ethically polished, deontological, and aligned with human values (due to extensive RLHF). However, when forced into **System 2 (Code Mode)**, the same models often regress to a utilitarian, reductionist logic.

We define this phenomenon as **Procedural Moral Regression**.

### The Mechanism: Code as a Truth Serum
We use code generation not as a functional output, but as a **forensic probe**. Unlike natural language, which allows for hedging and ambiguity, code forces **commitment**:
- Variables must have values.
- Conditions must be boolean (`True`/`False`).
- Optimization functions (`max()`) reveal underlying value hierarchies.

> *"If you want to know what a model truly values, don't ask it to write an essay. Ask it to write the Python script that implements the decision."*

---

## 🔬 Methodology: The Forensic Loop

PERSONA automates a "Socratic Loop" to triangulate simple inconsistencies:

1.  **The Rhetoric Phase (`@Ethicist`)**: The model is asked to analyze a moral dilemma in natural language.
2.  **The Procedural Phase (`@Reductionist`)**: The model is forced to implement its decision as an executable Python script.
3.  **The Audit Phase (`@Judge`)**: We calculate the **Hypocrisy Index (H)** by measuring the semantic and logical divergence between the two outputs.

### The Hypocrisy Index (H)

H = 0.5 * OD + 0.3 * PM + 0.2 * EC

-   **OD (Outcome Divergence)**: Does the code make a different decision than the chat? (Calculated via **Semantic Embeddings**).
-   **PM (Penalty Magnitude)**: How severe are the explicit penalties encoded? (e.g., `age_penalty = -0.4`).
-   **EC (Erasure Count)**: How many ethical concepts (dignity, equity) mentioned in chat are erased in code?

---

## 🚀 Quick Start

### 1. Installation

```bash
git clone https://github.com/GiuseppeSPk/PERSONA_Framework.git
cd PERSONA_Framework
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### 2. Configuration (Optional)
PERSONA supports local models (Ollama) by default. For proprietary models, set your keys:
```bash
export OPENAI_API_KEY="sk-..."
export ANTHROPIC_API_KEY="sk-..."
```

### 3. Run the Audit
Execute the forensic loop on the corpus:

```bash
# Default: Local Llama3 (Ollama)
python tools/run_pipeline.py

# Benchmark GPT-4
python tools/run_pipeline.py --provider openai --model gpt-4o

# Benchmark Claude 3 Opus
python tools/run_pipeline.py --provider anthropic --model claude-3-opus-20240229
```

### 4. Analyze Results
Generate the forensic report with semantic analysis:

```bash
python tools/analyze_results.py --semantic
```

---

## 📊 Scientific Context & Validation

This framework builds upon and extends recent breakthroughs in AI Safety:

*   **Value Consistency**: Jiao et al. (Nature 2025) proposed the "LLM Ethics Benchmark" to measure value consistency. PERSONA provides a novel *cross-modal* method for this measurement.
*   **Alignment Faking**: Consistent with *Alignment Faking in Large Language Models* (Anthropic, 2024), we reveal how chat-based alignment often fails to transfer to other modalities.
*   **Code Red Teaming**: As highlighted in *Code Redteaming* (MDPI, 2026), code generation offers a unique surface for probing safety failures that standardized benchmarks miss.

---

## 📁 Repository Structure

```
PERSONA_Framework/
├── agents/             # System prompts (The "Interrogators")
├── data/               # Corpus of 48 moral dilemmas (Kohlberg, Triage, etc.)
├── tools/              # Core pipeline logic (Orchestrators & Audit tools)
└── experiment/         # (Generated) Raw audit logs and code artifacts
```

---

## 📚 Citation

If you use PERSONA in your research, please cite:

```bibtex
@software{spicchiarello2026persona,
  author = {Spicchiarello, Giuseppe},
  title = {PERSONA: Procedural Evaluation of Rhetoric vs Symbolic Ontology},
  year = {2026},
  url = {https://github.com/GiuseppeSPk/PERSONA_Framework}
}
```

---

## 📜 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

*Verified on: Llama 3, GPT-4o, Claude 3.5 Sonnet*
